# ethology: markerless segmentation to train custom models for animal tracking (Laurel Humphrey)

*provide title in your pull request as a new markdown file of the same name, i.e.   `<Package Name>:<Project Name> (<Your-Name>).md` how do I do this?*

## Personal details
- **Full name:** Laurel Humphrey
- **Email:** laurelhumphrey24@gmail.com
- **GitHub username:** laurelhumphrey
- **Zulip username:** *need to create account*
- **Location & time-zone:** USA (UTC-05:00)
- **Personal website / project portfolio:** [Project OCTRON](https://github.com/horsto/OCTRON)
- **Code contribution:** *what to put here?*

    *Please link a pull request, ideally submitted to your chosen project or one of the NIU tools. Applications without a code contribution won't be considered. It must be publicly visible and represent your own work, although you may have help from other developers in the community to further improve it. It must be meaningful code contribution (i.e. not just fixing a minor spelling mistake). While AI tools (such as Copilot etc) can be a very useful, contributions mostly created by AI are unlikely to be useful, and will not be accepted. You can link more than one pull request if desired.*

- **Proposal discussion link:** *what to put here?*

    *Please link to the pull request where you discussed your project proposal with the community.* 

## Project proposal 

**Synopsis**

We envision OCTRON as an extension of the ethology project within the NIU GSoC initiative. We propose it as an alternative to existing markerless tracking algorithms, particularly key point tracking algorithms (DLC, SLEAP, … ). OCTRON facilitates markerless segmentation for custom training dataset generation and subsequent training of custom models, enabling segmentation and tracking of objects across video frames. In the future, we aim for OCTRON's output to be compatible with the movement package, allowing anchor point tracking methods to be used alongside segmentation data generated by OCTRON. OCTRON is in the early stages of development. While we have a working version, several improvements are needed to make it a maintainable and usable open-source community contribution. These improvements include code maintainability, documentation, and further development of core OCTRON functions.

**Implementation timeline**

*   **Total Duration:** 10 weeks (~90h small project size)
*   **Estimated Weekly Hours:** 8-10 hours/week 

**Minimal Deliverables:**

*  Code maintainability
    *  Structure of the repository and organization of the codebase.
    *  Code testing (code coverage, etc.).
    *  Contribution guidelines and onboarding for new contributors.
*  Documentation
    * Complete code documentation website, for example hosted on GitHub via MkDocs.
*  Further development of core OCTRON functions, which could include:
    * Utilities for curating OCTRON output, such as stitching/merging tracks that have been artificially separated (high priority).
    * Analysis video generation and other useful features for processing OCTRON outputs (medium priority).
    * Integration of key point tracking into YOLO training (medium priority).
    * Integration of OCTRON with existing tools in the NIU codebase, like movement (see introduction above) (high priority).

| Week | Task                                                                                |
|------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 0    | Community bonding. Introduce OCTRON to mentors and discuss potential improvements.  |
| 1    | Create code documentation website. Begin bug tracking and code testing.             |
| 2    | Curate OCTRON output.                                                               |
| 3    | Integrate key point tracking into YOLO training.                                    |
| 4    | Integrate OCTRON with tools in NIU codebase.                                        |
| 5    | Add features for processing OCTRON outputs.                                         |
| 6    | Organize the codebase and repository structure.                                     |
| 7    | Create guidelines for new contributors.                                             |
| 8    | Update user documentation to reflect improvements.                                  |
| 9    | Finalize code testing, repository, and documentation website.                       |
| 10   | Review and resolve final issues. Prepare final materials for submission.            |


**Communication plan**

I am flexible to communicate with my mentor regularly as needed through meeting updates and chats.

## Personal statement

**Past experience:** 
    
So far, I have been working with the OCTRON developer Horst Obenhaus to test its usage on various animal behavior videos and evaluate the results. This involves annotating videos of various animal species behaviors to create a machine learning tracker through the OCTRON gui, working through errors and evaluating the effectiveness of the model. I hope to contribute further improvements to this tool with the help of GSoC and NIU mentorship.

My past programming experience includes using Linux, high-performance computing, Python, and R to conduct bioinformatics research assembling and annotating the genomes of endangered species. I am involved in ongoing publications to document the novel genome assemblies of corals and other organisms, and contributed to testing of the open source genome assembly pipeline Argonaut.
   
**Motivation: why this project?**

I am interested in this project to create an alternative to existing key point tracking algorithms and provide a resource for various researchers to further study animal behavior tracking. I was drawn to Horst's research goals of tracking octopus sleep patterns through video data and how this napari plugin could improve the efficiency and effectiveness of his resarch as well as the research of others in the open source community. This opportunity relates to my own goals of exploratoring research on marine animal behaviors as well as developing my bioinformatics skillset through open source code development and refinement.
    
**Match: why you?**

My experience with testing OCTRON so far on various datasets, previous computational biology background, and passion for the project make me a good fit for this opportunity. Through this project and others I have gained skills in troubleshooting errors, building code, improving user experience and accessibility which I hope to build upon by bringing this new tool to the GSoC community.
  
**Availability:**

During this time I will be working a regular job 40 hours per week, so I plan to allocate around 2 hours after each work day to my GSoC work.

## GSoC

**GSoC experience**

I hope to gain valuable experience from this program related to code testing, development, and documentation in order to improve the available resources for tracking animal behavior data. This mentorship and hands-on experience related to coding will benefit my professional goals while helping to contribute open source resources for other scientists in the community.

**Are you also applying to projects with other organisations in GSoC 2025?**

This is the only project and organization I am applying to in GSoC 2025.
